mathematics
y for a right angle triangle is the
square of the hypotenuse equal to the
sum of the squares of the other two
sides
why
almost everyone learns that c squared
equals a squared plus b squared
but why does it asking why is asking for
the explanation in mathematics
explanations often involve a particular
structure or process and that process is
known as proof there are many proofs of
the pythagorean theorem some are
algebraic and begin with axioms others
are geometric
some graphical or even animated a book
exists containing
367 different proofs of the theorem in
all cases the proof constitutes the
mathematical explanation proofs exist so
one can be shown which is to say
understand why
c squared equals a squared plus b
squared for a right angle triangle but
proofs start somewhere they begin with
axioms axioms are things not proved they
are what is assumed true and indeed are
sometimes simply called the assumptions
on what basis can we assume they are
true many arguments are put forth here
often coming down to it is self-evident
it couldn't be otherwise a fallibalist
might say well we do not know they are
true we just assume tentatively they are
or perhaps we just say they are the
knowns they are what we know now and we
also know the rules of inference and
together we can see where they lead to
what conclusions or theorems in a
worldview that values explanations we
might even say the axioms are what they
are in mathematics because no
explanation is ever improved by changing
any of them those axioms themselves
constitute explanations of a kind claims
about reality not certainly true but
representations of necessary truth
we are all of us fallible even
mathematicians mathematics commands a
special place in academia traditionally
it is the subject to which all others
have aspired mathematics it has been
thought are where we finally get to
so-called epistemological bedrock some
certain an absolute truth where all
doubt is removed science can only aspire
to such lofty heights for science relies
on evidence open to interpretation and
so it is said only the accumulation of
sufficient amounts of it can ever make
us confident our theories are true or
probably true as for philosophy and
everything else
mere matters of opinion of course that
entire hierarchy of mathematics is
certain science is probably true and
everything else is more or less a matter
of opinion is itself
not a mathematical claim it's a
philosophical one instead mathematics is
better understood as distinguished by
its subject matter and method that
method of mathematical proof does not
mean
show as true what it means is
calculate or compute what follows given
some axioms using some rules of
inference mathematics is about
explaining necessary abstract truth but
as david deutsch wrote in the fabric of
reality in his chapter on mathematics
quote necessary truth is merely the
subject matter of mathematics
it is not the reward we get for doing
mathematics end quote in a sense much of
what david deutsch is famous for itself
proves that very conclusion in laying
the foundations for quantum computation
david proved what was then sometimes
called turing's thesis which may be
expressed as every physical process is
computable that implies anything in
physical reality can be simulated by a
computer from atoms to weather systems
galaxies even in principle a human brain
david deutsch took the thesis and on the
assumption of quantum theory proved it
after all computers and brains are not
abstract objects they are made of matter
matter obeying laws of physics laws of
quantum physics so now many call it the
church turing deutsch principle to
distinguish it from a mere thesis of
pure mathematics it is now properly
regarded as part of physics a principle
governing the behaviour of all physical
objects and that includes brains like
the brains of mathematicians the laws of
quantum physics say we can never rule
out the possibility of something
unexpected happening this is otherwise
explained as there is always subjective
randomness in other words you cannot
know the outcome exactly of any physical
process there will always be uncertainty
arrange this applies to brains classical
and quantum computers any process it
applies to what mathematicians do
quantum theory mandates we can never
know with absolute mathematical
certainty that a particular outcome must
happen there is always a range however
small the chance of error it does not
matter it is not zero is the point so
physical systems evolve in ways we
cannot know for sure
and that includes brains and the
outcomes of any computation and
mathematical proof constitutes a
computation and therefore cannot confer
upon its conclusions absolute certainty
not only because we cannot know for
certain the axioms are true but because
the process itself of mathematical proof
is a computation computations are done
by computers and computers obey the laws
of physics that rule out knowing for
certain that something unexpected did
not just happen during that proof
mathematics is the study of necessary
truth it constructs knowledge of
necessarily perfect abstractions but the
knowledge of that perfection is not the
perfection itself any more than
knowledge of electrons is electrons or
knowledge of birds is birds we are
fallible and knowledge is imperfect even
in mathematics